1
SS3 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES LESSON NOTES
FIRST TERM
WEEK 1: REVIEW OF SS2 WORK
1.1 INTRODUCTION
Welcome to SS3 Digital Technologies. This is the final and most advanced year of your
secondary school studies in this subject. This term, we will be building on the foundations you
learned in SS1 and SS2 to explore advanced programming, networking, cloud technologies, and
the Internet of Things (IoT).
This first week is dedicated to a comprehensive review to ensure we all have the same
foundational knowledge.
1.2 CORE CONCEPTS REVIEW (Q&A FORMAT)
A. BASIC PROGRAMMING
 What is a variable?
o A named container in memory used to store data (e.g., age = 17, name =
"Adebayo").
 What are the basic data types?
o String (text, e.g., "Hello"), Integer (whole numbers, e.g., 25), Float/Double
(decimal numbers, e.g., 19.5), Boolean (True or False).
 What is a 'conditional statement'?
o A statement that allows your code to make decisions. The if, else if (or elif), and
else keywords.
o Example: if (age > 18) { print("You can vote"); } else { print("You are not
eligible"); }
 What is a 'loop'?
o A structure that repeats a block of code.
o for loop: Repeats a specific number of times (e.g., for every item in a list).
2
o while loop: Repeats as long as a certain condition is true.
B. NETWORKING AND INTERNET
 What is a computer network?
o A collection of two or more computers connected together to share resources (like
files, printers, internet).
 Differentiate LAN, WAN, and MAN.
o LAN (Local Area Network): Small area (school, home, office).
o WAN (Wide Area Network): Large geographical area (the Internet is the largest
WAN).
o MAN (Metropolitan Area Network): A city-sized network.
 What is a network 'topology'?
o The physical or logical layout of a network (e.g., Star, Bus, Ring, Mesh).
 What is an 'IP Address'?
o A unique numerical label assigned to each device on a network, used for
identification and communication (e.g., 192.168.1.1).
 What are 'HTML' and 'CSS'?
o HTML (HyperText Markup Language): The structure of a webpage (the
"skeleton").
o CSS (Cascading Style Sheets): The style and presentation of a webpage (the
"skin" or "clothes").
C. DATABASE SYSTEMS
 What is a database?
o An organized, structured collection of data.
 What is a 'DBMS'?
o Database Management System: The software used to create, manage, and query
a database (e.g., MySQL, Microsoft SQL Server, PostgreSQL).
 What are 'tables', 'records', and 'fields'?
o Table: A collection of related data (e.g., a "Students" table).
3
o Record (or Row): A single entry in a table (e.g., all the info for one student).
o Field (or Column): A single piece of data in a record (e.g., the "FirstName"
field).
 What is 'SQL'?
o Structured Query Language: The standard programming language used to
"talk" to a database (e.g., SELECT * FROM Students WHERE Age > 16;).
EVALUATION (WEEK 1)
1. Write a simple if-else statement to check if a variable score is greater than or equal to 50.
2. What is the difference between a for loop and a while loop?
3. What do the acronyms LAN, HTML, and SQL stand for?
ASSIGNMENT (WEEK 1)
1. Briefly describe the function of the following network devices:
o Router
o Switch
o Firewall
2. Write a short paragraph explaining the relationship between HTML, CSS, and a web
browser.
4
WEEK 2: ADVANCED PROGRAMMING I (FUNCTIONS & ARRAYS/LISTS)
2.1 INTRODUCTION
This week, we move from writing linear scripts to writing structured code. The two most
important tools for this are Functions and Arrays/Lists. These tools help us write code that is
clean, reusable, and efficient.
2.2 FUNCTIONS
 What is a Function?
o A function is a reusable block of code that performs a specific task. You "define"
it once and can "call" (or "invoke") it many times.
 Why use Functions?
o DRY Principle (Don't Repeat Yourself): Instead of writing the same 10 lines of
code in five different places, you write it once inside a function and call it five
times.
o Abstraction: You can use a function without needing to know how it works, just
what it does (e.g., you use print() without knowing the complex code that sends
text to a screen).
o Organization: Breaks a large, complex program into smaller, manageable, and
understandable pieces.
 Key Concepts of a Function:
1. Definition: Creating the function using a keyword (like def in Python or function
in JavaScript).
2. Calling: Using the function's name to execute its code.
3. Parameters (Arguments): Variables in the function definition that act as inputs.
When you call the function, you pass arguments to these parameters.
4. Return Value: A function can send a value back to the code that called it using
the return keyword.
 Code Example (Python syntax for clarity):
 # 1. DEFINITION of a simple function
5
 def greet_student(student_name):
 # student_name is a PARAMETER
 print(f"Welcome to SS3, {student_name}!")
 print("Work hard this term.")

 # 2. CALLING the function
 greet_student("Tunde") # "Tunde" is the ARGUMENT
 greet_student("Aisha") # We can reuse it easily

 # 3. Function with a RETURN VALUE
 def calculate_area(length, width):
 # length and width are PARAMETERS
 area = length * width
 return area # SENDS this value back

 # 4. CALLING a function with a return value
 room_area = calculate_area(10, 5) # The value 50 is returned
 print(f"The area of the room is {room_area} square meters.")
2.3 ARRAYS / LISTS
 What is an Array/List?
o An array (or "list" in Python, "array" in JavaScript) is a single variable that can
hold a collection of multiple items in an ordered sequence.
 Why use Arrays?
o Imagine needing to store the scores of 50 students. You could create 50 variables
(score1, score2, score3...score50), which is a nightmare.
o Or, you could create one array: scores = [72, 85, 91, ..., 64]
 Key Concepts of an Array:
1. Elements: The individual items inside the array.
6
2. Index: The position of an element. CRITICAL: The index almost always starts
at 0, not 1.
 In [ "a", "b", "c" ], "a" is at index 0, "b" is at index 1, "c" is at index 2.
3. Accessing: You get an element using its index: my_array[index].
4. Modifying: You can change an element using its index.
5. Iterating: You can use a for loop to "visit" every element in the array.
 Code Example (Python syntax):
 # 1. CREATING a list
 fruits = ["Apple", "Banana", "Mango", "Orange"]

 # 2. ACCESSING elements (index starts at 0)
 first_fruit = fruits[0] # This will be "Apple"
 third_fruit = fruits[2] # This will be "Mango"

 # 3. MODIFYING elements
 fruits[1] = "Pawpaw" # Replaces "Banana"
 # The list is now: ["Apple", "Pawpaw", "Mango", "Orange"]

 # 4. ADDING elements
 fruits.append("Guava")
 # The list is now: ["Apple", "Pawpaw", "Mango", "Orange", "Guava"]

 # 5. ITERATING (looping) through the list
 print("My Fruit Basket:")
 for fruit in fruits:
 print(fruit)
EVALUATION (WEEK 2)
1. What is the "DRY" principle, and how do functions help achieve it?
2. What is the difference between a "parameter" and an "argument"?
3. If you have a list colors = ["Red", "Green", "Blue"], what is the index of "Green"?
7
4. Write a simple function (in pseudocode or any language) called add_numbers that takes
two numbers as parameters and returns their sum.
ASSIGNMENT (WEEK 2)
1. Create a list variable called subjects containing 5 of your SS3 subjects (as strings).
2. Write the code to:
o Print the first subject in the list.
o Print the third subject in the list.
o Change the last subject to "Digital Technologies".
o Write a for loop that prints every subject in the list.
8
WEEK 3: ADVANCED PROGRAMMING II (OBJECT-ORIENTED PROGRAMMING)
3.1 INTRODUCTION: A NEW WAY OF THINKING
In SS2, you learned "procedural programming" (writing code as a list of steps or functions).
Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) is a different paradigm (a way of thinking and
structuring code).
OOP is about modeling your program around real-world "objects" (like a Student, a Car, a
BankAccount) that have properties and actions.
3.2 THE CORE CONCEPTS: CLASS & OBJECT
1. Class: A blueprint or template for creating objects.
o A class defines the common properties and behaviors that its objects will have.
o Analogy: The architectural plan for a house is the Class. It defines that a house
will have "walls," "a roof," and "doors."
2. Object (or Instance): A specific instance of a class. It is the actual thing built from the
blueprint.
o Analogy: The actual house you build from the plan is the Object. Your house
(Tunde's house) and your neighbor's house (Aisha's house) are two different
objects of the same House class.
3.3 ATTRIBUTES & METHODS
 Attributes: These are the properties or data that an object holds. They are variables that
belong to the class.
o Analogy: For a Car class, attributes would be color, brand, model, current_speed.
 Methods: These are the actions or behaviors that an object can perform. They are
functions that belong to the class.
o Analogy: For a Car class, methods would be start_engine(), accelerate(), brake().
 Code Example (Python):
 # 1. DEFINING the Class (the blueprint)
9
 class Student:
 # The __init__ method is a special "constructor"
 # It runs when a new object is created
 def __init__(self, name, age, student_id):
 # 2. These are ATTRIBUTES
 self.name = name
 self.age = age
 self.student_id = student_id
 self.is_present = False # A default attribute

 # 3. This is a METHOD (an action)
 def mark_present(self):
 self.is_present = True
 print(f"{self.name} is now marked as present.")

 def introduce_self(self):
 print(f"Hello, my name is {self.name} and I am {self.age} years old.")

 # 4. CREATING OBJECTS (instances) from the Class
 # We are building the actual "houses" from the blueprint
 student1 = Student("Bello Tunde", 17, "SS3-001")
 student2 = Student("Fatima Ahmed", 16, "SS3-002")

 # 5. ACCESSING attributes and CALLING methods
 print(f"Student 1's name is: {student1.name}") # Access attribute
 print(f"Student 2's ID is: {student2.student_id}")

 student1.introduce_self() # Call method
 student2.introduce_self() # Call method

 print(f"Student 1 present? {student1.is_present}") # False
10
 student1.mark_present() # Call the method to change the attribute
 print(f"Student 1 present? {student1.is_present}") # True
3.4 THE FOUR PILLARS OF OOP
OOP is built on four major principles:
1. Encapsulation:
o What: Bundling the data (attributes) and the code (methods) that acts on that data
into a single unit (the object). It also means hiding the object's internal details and
protecting data from outside interference.
o Analogy: When you drive a car, you use the steering wheel and pedals (public
methods). You don't need to (and shouldn't) directly mess with the engine's
internal wiring (private data). The car encapsulates its own complexity.
2. Inheritance:
o What: A mechanism where a new class (the "child" or "subclass") automatically
inherits all the attributes and methods from an existing class (the "parent" or
"superclass").
o Analogy: A SportsCar (child) is a type of Car (parent). It inherits all the basic Car
properties (wheels, engine) but adds its own (like turbo_charge()).
3. Polymorphism:
o What: (Greek for "many forms"). The ability for an object, method, or variable to
be treated as more than one type. It allows a single action or method name to be
used for different types of objects.
o Analogy: You have a speak() method. For a Dog object, speak() will
print("Woof!"). For a Cat object, speak() will print("Meow!"). The same method
name does different things depending on the object.
4. Abstraction: (Similar to Encapsulation)
o What: Hiding complex implementation details and showing only the essential
features to the user.
11
o Analogy: Your TV remote. You see Volume Up, Power On. You don't see the
complex circuitry, infrared signals, or code that makes it work. The complexity is
abstracted away.
EVALUATION (WEEK 3)
1. In OOP, what is the difference between a "Class" and an "Object"?
2. Use the analogy of a "blueprint" and a "house" to explain your answer to Q1.
3. "Attributes" are to properties as "Methods" are to __________.
4. Which pillar of OOP involves a "child" class inheriting from a "parent" class?
ASSIGNMENT (WEEK 3)
1. Think of a real-world object to model as a class: "BankAccount".
2. On paper, list:
o Three (3) potential attributes this class should have (e.g., account_number,
balance).
o Two (2) potential methods (actions) this class should have (e.g., deposit(),
withdraw()).
3. (Bonus) Try to write the simple BankAccount class in pseudocode or Python.
12
WEEK 4: SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT LIFE CYCLE (SDLC)
4.1 INTRODUCTION
Great software (like an operating system, a mobile app, or a website) doesn't just "happen." It is
engineered. The Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC) is a structured, formal process that
engineering teams use to design, develop, test, and deploy high-quality software.
Using an SDLC helps to:
 Manage complexity and cost.
 Ensure the final product meets the user's needs.
 Reduce bugs and errors.
 Make the process predictable and repeatable.
4.2 THE 6 PHASES OF THE SDLC
Every SDLC model includes these core phases, though they may have slightly different names.
1. Phase 1: Planning & Requirement Analysis
o Question: What should we build (and why)?
o Action: This is the most important phase. It involves gathering requirements from
stakeholders (the client, users). What problems must it solve? What features must
it have?
o Output: A Software Requirement Specification (SRS) document.
2. Phase 2: Design
o Question: How will we build it?
o Action: Architects and senior developers create the blueprint for the system. This
includes:
 System Architecture: (e.g., cloud-based, server/client)
 Database Design: (What tables and fields?)
 UI/UX Design: (User Interface/User Experience: what it will look like
and feel like)
13
o Output: A Design Document (blueprints, wireframes).
3. Phase 3: Implementation (Coding)
o Question: Build it.
o Action: This is the phase most people think of as "programming." Developers
take the design documents and write the actual code in their chosen programming
language (Python, Java, C#, etc.).
o Output: The first version of the software.
4. Phase 4: Testing & Quality Assurance (QA)
o Question: Does it work? Is it broken?
o Action: The software is tested to find and fix bugs.
 Unit Testing: Testing individual components (e.g., does the
calculate_area() function work?).
 Integration Testing: Do all the components work together?
 System Testing: Testing the entire system as a whole.
o Output: A stable, tested version of the software; a list of fixed bugs.
5. Phase 5: Deployment
o Question: How do we get it to the user?
o Action: The software is released to the public or the client.
 For a website: Pushing the code to a live web server.
 For a mobile app: Publishing it on the Google Play Store or Apple App
Store.
o Output: The software is now "live."
6. Phase 6: Maintenance & Updates
o Question: How do we keep it working and improve it?
o Action: This is the longest phase. It involves:
 Fixing new bugs that are discovered.
 Adding new features (e.g., Version 2.0).
 Providing user support.
4.3 SDLC MODELS: WATERFALL VS. AGILE
The 6 phases are the "what." The model is the "how." It's the strategy for executing the phases.
14
A. THE WATERFALL MODEL
 Concept: A linear, sequential model. You must finish one phase completely before you
can start the next. It's like a waterfall: water flows down, it can't go back up.
o Phase 1 -> Phase 2 -> Phase 3 -> Phase 4 -> Phase 5 -> Phase 6
 Analogy: Building a physical house. You must finish the foundation (Design) before you
can build the walls (Implementation). You can't change the foundation plan halfway
through.
 Pros:
o Very simple to understand and manage.
o Good for projects where the requirements are known and fixed from the start.
 Cons:
o Highly Inflexible. If the client changes their mind in Phase 4, it's a disaster.
o Very Slow. The user doesn't see anything until the very end (Phase 5).
B. THE AGILE MODEL
 Concept: An iterative, incremental model. It's the opposite of Waterfall.
 Process: Instead of building the whole project at once, the team builds it in small, fast
pieces called "sprints" (usually 1-4 weeks).
 Cycle: In each sprint, the team goes through all the phases: Plan -> Design -> Build ->
Test -> Release (a small feature) ...then they start the next sprint.
 Analogy: Writing a book, chapter by chapter. You write Chapter 1, get feedback, then
write Chapter 2. This is much more flexible than writing the entire 300-page book before
anyone sees it.
 Pros:
o Extremely Flexible. Changes are welcomed at the start of each sprint.
o Fast Feedback. The client sees a working (though small) part of the product
every few weeks.
 Cons:
o Harder to manage.
o Less predictable on the final deadline and cost.
15
EVALUATION (WEEK 4)
1. What does SDLC stand for?
2. List the 6 main phases of the SDLC.
3. Which phase is considered the most important because it defines what the software will
do?
4. Briefly explain the main difference between the Waterfall model and the Agile model.
5. Which model (Waterfall or Agile) would be better for a project where the requirements
are unknown and expected to change often?
ASSIGNMENT (WEEK 4)
1. Imagine your class has been given a project: "Build a new app for the school tuck shop
to allow students to pre-order their lunch."
2. Briefly list the activities you would do in Phase 1 (Requirement Analysis). (Hint: Who
would you talk to? What questions would you ask?)
16
WEEK 5: MIDTERM TEST
This week is for assessment of all topics covered in Weeks 1-4 (Review, Functions, Arrays, OOP,
SDLC).
17
WEEK 6: NETWORKING II (IP ADDRESSING, SUBNETTING, PROTOCOLS)
6.1 INTRODUCTION
In SS2, we learned what a network is. Now, we learn how it works. Communication on the
internet is like a global postal service. It only works because of two things:
1. Addresses (IP Addresses): So every "house" (device) has a unique address.
2. Rules (Protocols): So everyone speaks the same "language" to send and receive "mail"
(data).
6.2 IP ADDRESSING
 What: An Internet Protocol (IP) Address is a unique numerical label assigned to every
device (computer, phone, server) on a network. Its purpose is identification and location
addressing.
 Versions:
1. IPv4 (Internet Protocol v4):
 The "old" (but still dominant) version.
 Format: 32-bit number, written as four 8-bit numbers (0-255).
 Example: 172.217.14.228 (This is one of Google's addresses)
 Problem: It only allows for ~4.3 billion addresses. We ran out!
2. IPv6 (Internet Protocol v6):
 The "new" version, designed to solve the address shortage.
 Format: 128-bit number, written in hexadecimal.
 Example: 2001:0db8:85a3:0000:0000:8a2e:0370:7334
 Public vs. Private IP:
o Public IP: Your one address on the global internet. Your router gets this from
your ISP (MTN, Glo, etc.).
o Private IP: The internal addresses used inside your home or school network (e.g.,
192.168.1.5, 10.0.0.2). These are not reachable from the internet. Your router acts
as the "gatekeeper."
18
6.3 SUBNETTING
 What: Subnetting is the process of taking one large network and logically dividing it into
smaller sub-networks (subnets).
 Why Subnet?
1. Security: You can put the "Accounts" department on one subnet and "Student
WiFi" on another. They can't see each other's traffic.
2. Organization & Performance: Reduces "broadcast traffic" (network noise).
 How it Works: The Subnet Mask
o A Subnet Mask is a number that "masks" off a part of the IP address to separate it
into two parts: the Network ID and the Host ID.
o IP Address: 192.168.1.10 (Who is this device?)
o Subnet Mask: 255.255.255.0 (What network is it on?)
o The 255s mean "This part is the Network." The 0 means "This part is the Host."
o So, for 192.168.1.10 with mask 255.255.255.0:
 Network ID: 192.168.1
 Host ID: 10
o Any device with the 192.168.1 Network ID is on the same subnet.
6.4 NETWORK PROTOCOLS
 What: Protocols are the rules and standards that allow different devices to
communicate. They are the "language" of the internet.
 The TCP/IP Suite: This is the collection of all the main protocols.
 Key Protocols to Know:
o IP (Internet Protocol): The "addressing" protocol. It puts the "To" and "From"
address on the data packet.
o TCP (Transmission Control Protocol):
 The "reliable" protocol.
 It breaks a large file into numbered packets, sends them, and checks if they
all arrived correctly. If not, it resends them.
19
 Use Case: Downloading a file, sending an email (you need 100% of the
data).
o UDP (User Datagram Protocol):
 The "fast" protocol. It just sends the packets and doesn't check.
 It's "unreliable" but much faster.
 Use Case: Video streaming, online gaming, a live call (if you miss one
pixel, who cares? The video must not buffer).
o HTTP (HyperText Transfer Protocol): The protocol for viewing websites.
o HTTPS (HTTP Secure): The secure, encrypted version of HTTP. (Always look
for the 's'!)
o FTP (File Transfer Protocol): For uploading and downloading large files.
o SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol): For sending email.
o DHCP (Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol): The protocol that
automatically assigns an IP address to your phone/laptop when you join a network.
EVALUATION (WEEK 6)
1. What is the main difference between IPv4 and IPv6? Why was IPv6 created?
2. What is the purpose of a Subnet Mask?
3. Explain the difference between your Public IP and Private IP.
4. Why would you use TCP for downloading a file but UDP for a video call?
5. What protocol automatically gives your phone an IP address at a public hotspot?
ASSIGNMENT (WEEK 6)
1. Find your computer's (or phone's) private IP address. (On Windows, type ipconfig in
Command Prompt. On Mac, check Network Settings. On phone, check Wi-Fi settings).
2. What does the 'S' in HTTPS stand for, and why is it important when you are online
shopping or banking?
20
WEEK 7: MIDTERM BREAK
This is a break from instruction. Students are encouraged to review the first half of the term's
work.
21
WEEK 8: CLOUD & VIRTUALIZATION
8.1 INTRODUCTION
This week we explore two of the most powerful technologies in modern computing, which are
the foundation of the internet you use every day: Virtualization and Cloud Computing.
8.2 VIRTUALIZATION
 What: Virtualization is the process of using software to create a virtual version of a
physical resource. You can virtualize a computer, a server, a storage device, or an
operating system.
 Key Component: The Hypervisor
o A hypervisor (e.g., VirtualBox, VMWare) is the software that creates and runs
Virtual Machines (VMs).
 What is a Virtual Machine (VM)?
o A VM is an emulated computer system that runs on top of another physical
computer. It's like having a "computer inside your computer."
 Analogy:
o Your physical laptop is the "Host" (e.g., a Windows 11 laptop).
o You install a hypervisor (like VirtualBox).
o Inside VirtualBox, you create a VM, which is just a set of files on your hard drive.
o You can then install a different OS (e.g., Linux or macOS) inside that VM.
o You now have Linux running in a window inside your Windows machine.
 Benefits:
o Efficiency: One powerful physical server can be "sliced" into 20 small VMs, all
running different tasks. This saves money, electricity, and space.
o Testing & Safety: A VM is "sandboxed." You can run a virus or test dangerous
software inside a VM, and it cannot harm your real (host) computer.
8.3 CLOUD COMPUTING
22
 What: Cloud computing is the on-demand delivery of IT resources (servers, storage,
databases, software) over the Internet ("the cloud") with pay-as-you-go pricing.
 How it relates to Virtualization: Cloud computing depends on virtualization. When you
"rent" a server from Amazon, you are just renting a VM on one of their giant physical
servers.
 Analogy: Physical Server vs. Cloud Server
o Traditional (On-Premise): You want to start a website. You must buy a physical
server, install it, power it, cool it, and secure it. This is like buying, fueling, and
maintaining your own generator. It's expensive and a lot of work.
o Cloud Computing: You just "rent" server space from a cloud provider (like
Amazon Web Services - AWS, Microsoft Azure, Google Cloud). This is like
using NEPA/PHCN. You just pay for the electricity you use, and they handle all
the generators and maintenance.
8.4 SERVICE MODELS OF CLOUD COMPUTING
This is a "stack" – each level builds on the one below it.
1. IaaS (Infrastructure as a Service)
o What: Renting the raw infrastructure – virtual servers (VMs), storage,
networking.
o Who uses it: System Admins, Network Engineers.
o Analogy: Renting an empty kitchen (oven, sink, counters). You must bring your
own ingredients and do all the cooking.
o Example: AWS EC2, Google Compute Engine.
2. PaaS (Platform as a Service)
o What: Renting the infrastructure plus the tools, operating systems, and databases
needed to build and deploy applications.
o Who uses it: Software Developers.
o Analogy: Renting a pizza kitchen (oven, counters, plus pre-made dough, cheese,
tomato sauce). You just have to assemble the pizza (write your app code).
o Example: Heroku, Google App Engine.
23
3. SaaS (Software as a Service)
o What: Renting a finished, ready-to-use software application that runs in your
browser.
o Who uses it: The end-user (you!).
o Analogy: Ordering a pizza. You don't cook, you just eat.
o Example: Gmail, Google Docs, Microsoft 365, Netflix. You don't own the
software; you just use it.
EVALUATION (WEEK 8)
1. What is a Virtual Machine (VM)?
2. What is the name of the software that creates and runs VMs?
3. Explain the "Generator vs. NEPA" analogy for Cloud Computing.
4. What do IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS stand for?
5. Is Gmail an example of IaaS, PaaS, or SaaS? Explain why.
ASSIGNMENT (WEEK 8)
1. List three (3) cloud services that you personally use every day. (Hint: social media, email,
streaming, file storage).
2. For each service, explain what data it is storing for you "in the cloud."
24
WEEK 9: INTERNET OF THINGS (IOT)
9.1 INTRODUCTION
The "Internet of Things" (IoT) is the next evolution of the internet.
 Internet of People: You use a device (laptop, phone) to manually access the internet.
 Internet of Things: Everyday physical objects (lights, cars, fridges, watches) are
embedded with sensors and Wi-Fi to automatically connect to the internet, collect data,
and talk to each other.
In short: IoT gives a "digital voice" and "senses" to dumb objects.
9.2 HOW IOT WORKS (THE 4 COMPONENTS)
1. The "Things" (Sensors/Devices): The physical object itself, plus a sensor to collect data.
o Example: A "Smart" Lightbulb + a motion sensor.
o Example: A "Smart" Watch + a heart-rate sensor.
2. Connectivity: The way the data gets to the internet.
o Example: Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, 4G/5G, LoRaWAN.
3. Data Processing: The data is sent "to the cloud" (see Week 8) where it is processed by
software.
o Example: The heart-rate data is sent to a server, which analyzes it.
4. User Interface: The way you interact with the data and control the device.
o Example: A mobile app on your phone that shows you your heart-rate history.
o Example: Your voice ("Alexa, turn on the lights").
9.3 APPLICATIONS OF IOT
A. SMART HOMES
This is the most common application you will see.
 Smart Speakers: (Amazon Echo, Google Home) Control your home with your voice.
25
 Smart Lighting: Lights that turn on automatically when you walk in, or that you can
control from your phone when you are on vacation.
 Smart Security: Security cameras that send an alert to your phone when they detect
motion. Smart locks that you can open with your phone.
 Smart Appliances: Fridges that tell you when you're out of milk (in development); smart
ACs that learn your schedule.
B. SMART CITIES
This is IoT on a large, public scale, used by a government to manage a city.
 Smart Traffic Management: Traffic lights that use live camera data to adjust their
timing, reducing congestion.
 Smart Parking: Sensors in parking spaces that tell an app where the empty spots are.
 Smart Waste Management: Waste bins with sensors that signal the waste truck when
they are full, so trucks don't waste fuel checking empty bins.
 Smart Grid: An electricity grid that can intelligently manage power, reducing blackouts.
C. OTHER MAJOR AREAS
 Wearables: Smartwatches (Apple Watch) and fitness trackers (Fitbit) that monitor your
health.
 Smart Agriculture: Farmers using sensors to monitor soil moisture and exactly how
much water/fertilizer a crop needs, reducing waste.
 Industrial IoT (IIoT): Factories using sensors to predict when a machine is about to
break down, so it can be fixed before it fails.
9.4 CHALLENGES OF IOT
 Security: This is the #1 problem. Every "smart" device is a "hackable" device. A hacker
could take over your smart camera or, worse, a city's smart traffic lights.
 Privacy: These devices are always listening and always collecting data. Who owns that
data? What are they doing with it?
26
 Connectivity: In Nigeria, the reliability of Wi-Fi and 5G is a major challenge.
EVALUATION (WEEK 9)
1. In your own words, what is the "Internet of Things"?
2. List the 4 basic components of any IoT system.
3. "Smart Waste Management" is an example of what larger IoT application? (Smart Home,
Smart City, or Wearables?)
4. What is the single biggest challenge facing IoT technology?
ASSIGNMENT (WEEK 9)
1. Design a new (or existing) "Smart" device for a Nigerian home.
2. Describe:
o What is the device?
o What sensor(s) would it use? (e.g., temperature, motion, light, water)
o What problem would it solve for a Nigerian family?
o (e.g., A smart water tank sensor that sends an alert to your phone when "NEPA
water" is available or when your tank is full/empty).
27
WEEK 10: DATA PROTECTION & BACKUP SYSTEMS
10.1 INTRODUCTION
In the digital age, data is the new oil. It is the most valuable asset for any company and for you.
 Company Data: Customer lists, financial records, secret code.
 Personal Data: Your photos, bank details, school projects, ID numbers.
What happens if you lose it? A business can fail. A person's life can be ruined. This week, we
learn the professional strategies to protect and recover data.
10.2 BACKUP SYSTEMS
 What is a Backup? A copy of your data stored in a separate, safe location.
 The 3-2-1 Rule (The "Gold Standard"): This is the best practice for backups.
o 3 copies of your data (the original + 2 backups).
o 2 different types of storage media (e.g., 1 on your computer, 1 on an external hard
drive).
o 1 copy must be off-site (e.g., in the cloud, at your office, in another building).
Why? If your house burns down, it takes your computer and your external hard
drive. The off-site copy is your only protection.
 Backup Types:
o Full Backup: Copies everything, every time. (Slow, takes lots of space).
o Incremental Backup: Copies only the files that have changed since the last
backup. (Fast, less space).
o Differential Backup: Copies all files that have changed since the last FULL
backup.
10.3 REDUNDANCY (HIGH AVAILABILITY)
 What: Redundancy is not a backup. Redundancy is about preventing failure in the first
place by duplicating critical hardware components. It's for systems that cannot be
allowed to fail.
28
 Backup vs. Redundancy (Analogy):
o A Backup is the spare tire in your car's trunk. If you get a flat, you have to stop,
do some work (restore), and then you can drive again.
o Redundancy is a dual-wheel truck. It has two tires right next to each other. If one
goes flat, the other is already working and the truck doesn't even stop.
 Example: RAID
o RAID (Redundant Array of Independent Disks): Using multiple hard drives as
one unit.
o RAID 1 (Mirroring): You have two hard drives. All data is written to both drives
at the same time. If one drive fails, the other one takes over instantly. There is
zero downtime.
10.4 DISASTER RECOVERY (DR)
 What: A Disaster Recovery (DR) Plan is the complete, formal plan for what to do when
a disaster happens (fire, flood, cyberattack, building collapse). A backup is just one part
of a DR plan.
 The plan includes:
o Who to call.
o Where the off-site backups are.
o How to restore the data.
o How to set up new servers.
 Key Metrics in a DR Plan:
1. RPO (Recovery Point Objective):
 Question: How much data can we afford to lose?
 Answer: This tells you how often to back up.
 Example: If a bank sets an RPO of 1 minute, they must back up their
transactions every minute. If the RPO is 1 day, a full nightly backup is fine.
2. RTO (Recovery Time Objective):
 Question: How fast do we need to be back online?
 Answer: This tells you how much to spend on redundancy.
29
 Example: Jumia's website might have an RTO of 5 minutes (very
expensive). A school's website might have an RTO of 24 hours (cheaper).
EVALUATION (WEEK 10)
1. What is the 3-2-1 Rule of backup?
2. Explain why the "1" (one copy off-site) is so important.
3. What is the difference between a Backup and Redundancy? (Use the spare tire analogy).
4. What does RAID stand for?
5. Define RPO and RTO. Which one measures time lost and which one measures data lost?
ASSIGNMENT (WEEK 10)
1. Create a personal Disaster Recovery plan for your schoolwork (e.g., your WAEC project,
your notes).
2. How will you implement the 3-2-1 rule?
o Where is Copy 1 (Original)?
o Where is Copy 2 (Local Backup)?
o Where is Copy 3 (Off-site Backup)? (e.g., 1. On my laptop. 2. On a USB flash
drive. 3. Emailed to myself / on Google Drive).
30
WEEK 11-13: REVISION & EXAMINATIONS
 This period is for a comprehensive review of all topics from the term.
 Key Connections to Review:
o How does OOP (Week 3) help organize the code for a complex SDLC project
(Week 4)?
o How is Virtualization (Week 8) the technology that makes Cloud Computing
(Week 8) possible?
o How does the IoT (Week 9) rely heavily on Cloud (Week 8) for data processing
and Networking Protocols (Week 6) for communication?
o Why is a Data Backup & DR Plan (Week 10) so critical for any IoT (Week 9)
or Cloud (Week 8) company?
 Practice past questions and prepare for the final examination.
31
SS3 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES LESSON NOTES
SECOND TERM
WEEK 1: ADVANCED WEB DESIGN (JAVASCRIPT & RESPONSIVE DESIGN)
1.1 INTRODUCTION
In SS1/SS2, you learned the "Big Two" of web design:
1. HTML (HyperText Markup Language): The structure or "skeleton" of a webpage.
2. CSS (Cascading Style Sheets): The style or "skin/clothes" of a webpage (colours, fonts,
layout).
This week, we learn the "Big Third": JavaScript (JS).
 JavaScript: The behaviour or "brain/muscles" of a webpage. It makes the website
interactive.
A house analogy: HTML is the foundation and walls. CSS is the paint and furniture. JavaScript
is the electricity, the sliding gate, and the doorbell.
1.2 JAVASCRIPT (JS) INTERACTIVITY
 What is JavaScript? JavaScript is a high-level, client-side scripting language. "Clientside"
means it runs in the user's web browser (like Chrome, Firefox), not on the server.
 What does it do? It allows you to manipulate the HTML and CSS of a webpage after
it has loaded. This creates a dynamic, responsive experience for the user.
 Core Functions of JavaScript:
1. Responding to Events: An "event" is anything the user does (e.g., onclick,
onmouseover, onkeydown, onsubmit). JS "listens" for these events and runs a
function in response.
32
2. Manipulating the DOM: The DOM (Document Object Model) is the browser's
internal map of your HTML page. JS can add, remove, or change any HTML
element on the page without reloading.
3. Form Validation: Instantly checking a user's input before they submit a form
(e.g., "This email address is invalid," "Password is too short").
4. Making Asynchronous Requests (AJAX/Fetch): Loading new data from a
server in the background without refreshing the page (e.g., loading new tweets,
fetching a live score).
5. Creating Sliders, Pop-ups, and Modals: Almost any interactive component on a
modern website is powered by JS.
 Simple Code Example (HTML File):
 <!DOCTYPE html>
 <html>
 <head>
 <title>JS Demo</title>
 <style>
 #message { color: red; font-size: 20px; }
 button { padding: 10px; }
 </style>
 </head>
 <body>

 <h1>JavaScript Demo Page</h1>

 <!-- 1. HTML elements with unique IDs -->
 <p id="message">This text will change.</p>
 <button id="myButton">Click Me!</button>

 <!-- 2. Include JavaScript at the bottom -->
 <script>
 // 3. Select the HTML elements using their IDs
33
 const messageElement = document.getElementById("message");
 const buttonElement = document.getElementById("myButton");

 // 4. Define a function to run
 function changeTheText() {
 messageElement.textContent = "See? The text changed!";
 messageElement.style.color = "green";
 }

 // 5. Listen for the 'click' EVENT on the button
 // When clicked, it will run the changeTheText function
 buttonElement.addEventListener("click", changeTheText);
 </script>

 </body>
 </html>
1.3 RESPONSIVE DESIGN (CSS MEDIA QUERIES)
 What is Responsive Design? It is the practice of designing a single website that adapts
and responds to the size of the user's screen. The goal is to make the website look good
and be easy to use on any device (a large desktop monitor, a laptop, a tablet, and a small
mobile phone).
 Why is it Essential? Most internet traffic (over 60%) is now on mobile phones. A
website that is not responsive will be tiny, unreadable, and impossible to use on a phone,
and you will lose most of your users.
 The Key Tool: The "Viewport" Meta Tag You must put this in your <head> tag. It
tells the mobile browser to not "lie" about its width and to render the page at its true
device width. <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0">
 The Main Technique: CSS Media Queries A media query is a CSS feature that allows
you to apply different styles only when certain conditions are met (like the screen's
width).
34
 Code Example (CSS File):
 /* 1. Default styles (for mobile phones first - "Mobile-First" design) */
 body {
 font-size: 16px;
 line-height: 1.5;
 }

 .container {
 width: 100%; /* On mobile, use the full width */
 padding: 10px;
 }

 .sidebar {
 display: none; /* Hide the sidebar on mobile */
 }

 /* 2. MEDIA QUERY: For tablets (e.g., screen is AT LEAST 600px wide) */
 @media (min-width: 600px) {
 .container {
 width: 90%;
 margin: 0 auto; /* Center it */
 }
 .sidebar {
 display: block; /* Show the sidebar again */
 }
 }

 /* 3. MEDIA QUERY: For desktops (e.g., screen is AT LEAST 1024px wide) */
 @media (min-width: 1024px) {
 .container {
 width: 80%;
35
 max-width: 1200px; /* Set a max width */
 }
 body {
 font-size: 18px; /* Make text slightly bigger */
 }
 }
EVALUATION (WEEK 1)
1. Explain the "House Analogy" for HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.
2. What does "client-side" mean in the context of JavaScript?
3. What is the DOM, and what does JavaScript do to it?
4. Define "Responsive Design."
5. What is the main CSS technique used to create a responsive design?
ASSIGNMENT (WEEK 1)
1. Using the JavaScript example, write the HTML and JS code for a button that, when
clicked, hides a paragraph (Hint: element.style.display = "none";).
2. Write a simple CSS media query that changes the body background colour to lightgrey
only if the screen is wider than 800px.
36
WEEK 2: ADVANCED DATABASE MANAGEMENT (SQL BASICS)
2.1 INTRODUCTION
In SS1/SS2, we learned what a database is (tables, records, fields). Now, we learn how to talk to
one. SQL (Structured Query Language) is the universal programming language for creating,
retrieving, and managing data in a Relational Database Management System (RDBMS).
 RDBMS Examples: MySQL, PostgreSQL, Microsoft SQL Server, SQLite.
2.2 CATEGORIES OF SQL COMMANDS
1. DDL (Data Definition Language): Defines the structure of the database.
o CREATE: Creates a new database or table.
o ALTER: Modifies an existing table (e.g., add a column).
o DROP: Deletes a database or table.
2. DML (Data Manipulation Language): Manages the data within the tables.
o INSERT: Adds a new row (record).
o UPDATE: Modifies data in an existing row.
o DELETE: Deletes a row.
3. DQL (Data Query Language): The most common command, used to ask questions and
retrieve data.
o SELECT: Fetches data from tables.
2.3 PRACTICAL SQL QUERIES
Let's imagine we have a table named Students:
Table: Students | StudentID | FirstName | LastName | Age | City | |---|---|---|---|---| | 101 | Tunde |
Bello | 17 | Lagos | | 102 | Fatima | Ahmed | 16 | Kano | | 103 | Chinedu | Okafor | 18 | Enugu | |
104 | Aisha | Lawal | 17 | Lagos |
A. SELECT: Retrieving Data (DQL)
37
 Get ALL columns and ALL rows:
 SELECT * FROM Students;
(Result: The entire table)
 Get only specific columns:
 SELECT FirstName, LastName, City FROM Students;
(Result: A 3-column table with all 4 students)
 Get data with a filter using WHERE:
 SELECT * FROM Students WHERE City = 'Lagos';
(Result: Only the rows for Tunde and Aisha)
 Using WHERE with a number:
 SELECT FirstName, LastName FROM Students WHERE Age > 16;
(Result: Tunde, Chinedu, and Aisha)
 Using WHERE with AND or OR:
 SELECT * FROM Students WHERE City = 'Lagos' AND Age < 18;
(Result: Only Tunde's row)
B. INSERT: Adding New Data (DML)
 To add a new student:
 INSERT INTO Students (StudentID, FirstName, LastName, Age, City)
 VALUES (105, 'Emeka', 'Nwosu', 17, 'Onitsha');
(Result: The table now has 5 rows)
C. UPDATE: Modifying Data (DML)
38
 To correct Chinedu's age (CRITICAL: Always use WHERE with UPDATE or you
change every row!):
 UPDATE Students
 SET Age = 19
 WHERE StudentID = 103;
(Result: Chinedu's row now shows Age = 19)
D. DELETE: Removing Data (DML)
 To delete Emeka's record (CRITICAL: Always use WHERE with DELETE!):
 DELETE FROM Students
 WHERE StudentID = 105;
(Result: The table is back to 4 rows)
E. CREATE TABLE: Defining a New Table (DDL)
 This is how we would have made the table in the first place:
 CREATE TABLE Students (
 StudentID INT PRIMARY KEY,
 FirstName VARCHAR(100),
 LastName VARCHAR(100),
 Age INT,
 City VARCHAR(50)
 );
o INT: Integer
o VARCHAR(100): A variable-length text string (up to 100 characters).
o PRIMARY KEY: A special constraint that says StudentID must be unique for
every row. It's the main identifier.
2.4 DATABASE REPORTS
39
 A database "report" is simply the output of a well-structured query, often presented in a
user-friendly format (like a table in an application or a printed summary).
 Advanced Queries for Reports:
o ORDER BY: Sorts the results.
o SELECT * FROM Students ORDER BY LastName ASC; -- (ASC = A-Z)
o COUNT: Counts the number of rows.
o SELECT COUNT(*) FROM Students WHERE City = 'Lagos'; -- (Result: 2)
EVALUATION (WEEK 2)
1. What does SQL stand for?
2. What are the 3 main categories of SQL commands? (DDL, DML, DQL)
3. Write the SQL command to get only the FirstName and Age of all students from the
Students table.
4. Write the SQL command to find all information about the student whose StudentID is
102.
5. What is the critical keyword you must use with UPDATE and DELETE to avoid
changing the whole table?
ASSIGNMENT (WEEK 2)
1. Using the Students table:
2. Write the full SQL query to INSERT a new student: 106, David, Mark, 16, Abuja.
3. Write the full SQL query to UPDATE David Mark's Age to 17.
4. Write the full SQL query to SELECT all students who are from Lagos or Kano.
40
WEEK 3: NETWORKING III (NETWORK SECURITY & VPNS)
3.1 INTRODUCTION
A network is a "highway" for data. Network security is the practice of protecting that highway—
and the "cargo" (data) on it—from thieves, spies, and vandals (hackers). As our entire lives
(banking, social, health) move online, network security is no longer optional; it is critical.
3.2 THE "CIA" TRIAD OF SECURITY
The goal of all security is to protect three things (the "CIA" Triad):
1. Confidentiality: Keeping data secret and private. Only authorized users can see it.
(Achieved by: Encryption, Passwords)
2. Integrity: Keeping data accurate and trustworthy. Only authorized users can change it.
(Achieved by: Hashes, Digital Signatures)
3. Availability: Ensuring data and services are online and accessible when needed.
(Achieved by: Firewalls, Redundancy, DDoS protection)
3.3 KEY SECURITY TOOLS & THREATS
A. FIREWALLS
 What: A network security device (hardware or software) that acts as a "gatekeeper" or
"bouncer" for a network.
 Function: It monitors and filters all incoming and outgoing network traffic. It follows a
set of rules to decide what traffic to Allow and what traffic to Block.
 Analogy: A firewall is the security guard at the gate of your school. They check the ID of
everyone trying to enter (incoming) and can stop a student from leaving with stolen
property (outgoing).
B. COMMON THREATS
41
 Malware (Malicious Software): The "umbrella" term for any software designed to cause
harm.
o Virus: Attaches itself to a clean file (like a parasite) and spreads when the file is
opened.
o Worm: A standalone program that self-replicates across a network (like a real
worm), consuming bandwidth and infecting other computers.
o Ransomware: Encrypts all your files, making them unreadable. The hacker then
demands a "ransom" (payment) in Bitcoin to give you the decryption key.
o Spyware: Secretly monitors your activity (keystrokes, webcam) to steal
passwords or personal info.
 Phishing ("Fishing"):
o A "social engineering" attack. The hacker impersonates a trusted brand (like your
bank or Google) and sends you a fake email or text message.
o The email creates urgency ("Your account has been locked! Click here to fix it.")
o The link leads to a fake website that looks real. When you enter your username
and password, the hacker steals it.
 Denial of Service (DoS / DDoS) Attack:
o An attack on Availability.
o The hacker uses a "botnet" (an army of thousands of infected computers) to flood
a target server (like Jumia's website) with millions of fake requests.
o The server is overwhelmed and crashes, becoming "unavailable" to real customers.
3.4 VPNS (VIRTUAL PRIVATE NETWORKS)
 What is a VPN? A VPN is a technology that creates a secure, encrypted connection (a
"tunnel") over a public, untrusted network (like the internet).
 How it Works (Analogy):
o Without a VPN: You are driving your car on a public road. Anyone watching
(your ISP, hackers at a public Wi-Fi hotspot) can see what car you are driving
(your IP address) and where you are going (what website you are visiting).
o With a VPN: A VPN builds a private, underground, encrypted tunnel from your
computer to the VPN server.
42
1. Your data is encrypted (scrambled) before it leaves your computer.
2. It travels through the tunnel to the VPN server (e.g., in Switzerland).
3. The VPN server decrypts your data and sends it to the final website (e.g.,
Google).
 The "3 C's" - What a VPN Does:
1. Concealment (Privacy): It hides your real IP address and replaces it with the IP
address of the VPN server. This makes you anonymous and "hides" your location.
2. Confidentiality (Security): It encrypts your traffic. This is CRITICAL on public Wi-Fi
(e.g., at an airport or cafe). Without a VPN, a hacker on that Wi-Fi can easily "sniff" (steal) your
passwords. With a VPN, all they see is scrambled gibberish.
3. Circumvention (Access): It allows you to bypass geo-restrictions. A website (like
Netflix) sees you are coming from the Swiss server, so it shows you Swiss content, not Nigerian
content.
EVALUATION (WEEK 3)
1. What are the three components of the "CIA" Triad of security?
2. What is the main job of a Firewall?
3. Explain the difference between a Virus and a Worm.
4. What is a Phishing attack?
5. Explain the "encrypted tunnel" analogy for a VPN.
6. List the "3 C's" (benefits) of using a VPN.
ASSIGNMENT (WEEK 3)
1. You receive an email from "First Bank" (a bank you don't even use) saying "URGENT:
Your account has been suspended due to unusual activity. Click
https://www.google.com/search?q=www.firstbank-login-portal.com to verify."
2. List three (3) "red flags" (clues) that this is a phishing attack.
43
WEEK 4: DIGITAL PROJECT MANAGEMENT
4.1 INTRODUCTION
A "project" is a temporary effort to create a unique product, service, or result (e.g., building a
website, developing an app, setting up a school network). Project Management is the discipline
of planning, organizing, and managing all the resources (people, time, money) to successfully
complete the project on time, within budget, and to the required quality.
In SS3 (Term 1, Week 4), we studied the SDLC (Software Development Life Cycle), which is
the process of building software. Project Management is the management of that process.
4.2 THE "IRON TRIANGLE" (TRIPLE CONSTRAINT)
Every project is managed by balancing three competing constraints. You cannot change one
without affecting the others.
1. Scope: What are we building? (The features, the tasks, the quality).
2. Time: How long will it take? (The schedule, the deadline).
3. Cost: How much will it cost? (The budget, the resources).
 The Rule:
o Want it faster (Time ↓)? You must either pay more (Cost ↑) or cut features (Scope
↓).
o Want more features (Scope ↑)? You must add more time (Time ↑) or pay more
(Cost ↑).
o Want it cheaper (Cost ↓)? You must take longer (Time ↑) or cut features (Scope
↓).
 The Project Manager's Job: To balance this triangle.
4.3 TEAMWORK IN DIGITAL PROJECTS
Digital projects are never built by one person. They require a team of specialists.
44
 Project Manager (PM): The leader. Manages the schedule, budget, and team.
 UI/UX Designer: Designs how the product will look and feel.
 Frontend Developer: Builds the part the user sees (HTML, CSS, JS).
 Backend Developer: Builds the "engine" (server, database, logic).
 QA (Quality Assurance) Engineer: Tries to break the product (testing) to find bugs.
Key to Teamwork:
 Communication: Regular meetings (e.g., "Daily Stand-ups" in Agile).
 Collaboration: Using tools that let everyone work on the same project.
 Version Control: A system (like Git) that tracks every single change to the code, so if
someone makes a mistake, you can "rewind."
4.4 PROJECT MANAGEMENT TOOLS
A PM doesn't just use a notebook. They use specialized software to track everything.
A. KANBAN BOARDS (e.g., TRELLO)
 Concept: A simple, visual way to manage tasks. It's a "pull" system.
 How it works: You have a board with columns (lists) that represent stages of a workflow.
o To Do (The list of all tasks)
o Doing (What the team is working on right now)
o Done (Completed tasks)
 Tasks are "cards" that you move from left to right.
 Best for: Agile teams, small projects, visual thinkers.
B. GANTT CHARTS (e.g., MS PROJECT, ASANA)
 Concept: A complex bar chart that visualizes the entire project schedule over time.
 How it works:
o Every task is a horizontal bar.
o The length of the bar shows how long the task will take.
o It shows dependencies (e.g., you can't "Test" until "Build" is finished).
45
 Best for: Waterfall projects, large complex schedules, managing deadlines.
EVALUATION (WEEK 4)
1. Define "Project Management."
2. What are the three points of the "Iron Triangle" (Triple Constraint)?
3. A client tells you, "I need the project finished in half the time, but I can't pay you more."
According to the Iron Triangle, what must happen?
4. Explain the "To Do / Doing / Done" workflow of a Kanban Board.
5. What is the main difference between a Gantt Chart and a Kanban Board? (Hint: one is
about time, one is about flow).
ASSIGNMENT (WEEK 4)
1. Go to a free Kanban website (like Trello.com) or draw one on paper.
2. Create a board for your "SSCE Exam Preparation."
3. Create three lists: Subjects To Study (To Do), Subjects I Am Studying (Doing), Subjects
I Have Mastered (Done).
4. Add "cards" for 5-6 subjects (Maths, English, Digital Tech, etc.) and place them in the
correct list.
WEEK 5: MIDTERM TEST
This week is for assessment of all topics covered in Weeks 1-4 (JS/Responsive, SQL,
Security/VPN, Project Management).
46
WEEK 6: EMERGING TECH III (QUANTUM & NANO)
6.1 INTRODUCTION
This week, we look beyond today's technology to the "deep future." These are technologies,
based on fundamental physics and chemistry, that will change everything.
6.2 QUANTUM COMPUTING
 Classical Computing (Your Laptop):
o Works on "Bits".
o A Bit is a simple switch. It can only be a 0 (Off) OR a 1 (On).
o It's powerful, but it can only do one thing at a time (sequentially).
 Quantum Computing:
o Works on "Qubits" (Quantum Bits).
o Thanks to a weird quantum-physics property called "Superposition", a Qubit can
be a 0, a 1, or BOTH at the same time.
o This allows a quantum computer to perform millions of calculations
simultaneously.
 Analogy: Finding a Book in a Library
o Classical Computer: It's like you walking down every single aisle, one by one,
until you find the book. (Takes a long time).
o Quantum Computer: It's like you can instantly check every aisle in the entire
library at the exact same moment. (Incredibly fast).
 What will it be used for?
1. Breaking Encryption: This is the scary one. A large quantum computer could instantly
break the encryption (like HTTPS, VPNs) that protects all global banking and military secrets.
2. Drug & Materials Discovery: Simulating complex molecules to invent new medicines
or materials.
3. Complex Simulations: Modeling climate change, or complex financial markets.
 Current Status: Highly experimental. They are massive, super-cooled, and very unstable.
We are not going to have a "Quantum Laptop" anytime soon.
47
6.3 NANOTECHNOLOGY
 What is it? Technology, engineering, and science conducted at the nanoscale.
 What is the "Nanoscale"? It is the "atomic" or "molecular" level. A "nanometer" (nm)
is one-billionth of a meter.
o A human hair is ~80,000 nm wide.
o A DNA strand is ~2.5 nm wide.
 Analogy: It is manufacturing and engineering with individual atoms as your building
blocks.
 What is it used for? (Applications are already here!)
1. Medicine (Nanomedicine):
 Drug Delivery: Designing "nanobots" or "nanoshells" that can carry a
drug (like chemotherapy) directly to a single cancer cell and ignore the
healthy cells.
2. Materials Science:
 Carbon Nanotubes: A material 100x stronger than steel but 1/6th the
weight. Used in airplanes, stronger sports equipment.
 Nanoparticle Coatings: Creating surfaces that are self-cleaning, antibacterial,
or super-hydrophobic (water-repellent) for use in paints, glass,
and clothing.
3. Electronics:
 Making computer chips smaller, faster, and more power-efficient by
building them at the nanoscale.
EVALUATION (WEEK 6)
1. What is the difference between a classical "Bit" and a "Qubit"?
2. What is "Superposition"?
3. Explain the "library" analogy for Classical vs. Quantum computing.
4. What is the "nanoscale"? (How many nanometers in a meter?)
5. List two current or future applications of Nanotechnology.
48
ASSIGNMENT (WEEK 6)
1. "A powerful quantum computer is the single biggest threat to global network security."
2. Write a one-paragraph explanation of why this statement is true (Hint: relate it to Week
3's topic of encryption).
49
WEEK 7: MIDTERM BREAK
This is a break from instruction. Students are encouraged to review the first half of the term's
work and begin reviewing SS1/SS2 notes for the revision weeks.
50
WEEK 8: REVISION OF SSCE PAST QUESTIONS I (THEORY)
8.1 INTRODUCTION
For the next two weeks, our goal is 100% SSCE (WASSCE/NECO) preparation. We will move
from learning new topics to applying all our knowledge from SS1, SS2, and SS3.
This week, we focus on Theory (Essay-Style) Questions. These questions test your depth of
knowledge and your ability to explain concepts clearly.
8.2 STRATEGY FOR THEORY QUESTIONS
1. Read the Verb: Pay attention to the action word.
o "List" / "State": Give a simple list. DO NOT write an essay.
o "Define": Give a clear, one-sentence definition.
o "Explain" / "Describe" / "Discuss": This is where you write. Define the term,
then explain it, and always use an example.
o "Differentiate": Give a head-to-head comparison, ideally in a table.
2. Use Keywords: Your examiner is looking for the keywords you learned. (e.g., For
"Firewall," they want "monitors," "filters," "incoming/outgoing," "rules").
3. Be Clear, Not Long: Be concise. A clear, 3-sentence answer is better than a confused
10-sentence one.
8.3 WORKED EXAMPLES (SS1-SS3 TOPICS)
Q1. (a) What is a computer network? (b) List and explain two (2) types of networks.
 (a) What is a computer network?
o Answer: A computer network is a collection of two or more computers and
devices, connected together by a communication medium (like cables or Wi-Fi),
for the purpose of sharing data and resources (like printers or an internet
connection).
 (b) List and explain two (2) types of networks.
o Answer:
51
1. LAN (Local Area Network): This network covers a small geographical
area, such as a single office, a school, or a home. The devices are
physically close, and the network is usually privately owned.
2. WAN (Wide Area Network): This network covers a large geographical
area, such as a city, country, or even the whole world. It connects multiple
LANs together, often using public infrastructure like telephone lines or
satellites. The Internet is the world's largest WAN.
Q2. (a) Define 'Database'. (b) Explain the following terms with an example: (i) Field (ii)
Record
 (a) Define 'Database'.
o Answer: A database is a structured, organized collection of data, stored and
accessed electronically, and managed by a Database Management System
(DBMS).
 (b) Explain (i) Field (ii) Record
o Answer:
 (i) Field: A Field is a single column in a database table. It represents one
specific piece of data for all records. Example: In a "Students" table,
"FirstName" would be a field.
 (ii) Record: A Record is a single row in a database table. It represents one
complete entry or item, containing all the field data for that item. Example:
The row "101, Tunde, Bello, 17, Lagos" is one record.
Q3. (a) What is JavaScript? (b) State three (3) functions of JavaScript on a webpage.
 (a) What is JavaScript?
o Answer: JavaScript is a client-side scripting language that runs in the user's web
browser, used to make webpages dynamic and interactive.
 (b) State three (3) functions:
o Answer:
1. To respond to user events (like clicks or mouse movements).
52
2. To validate data in forms before they are submitted.
3. To manipulate the DOM (change HTML content or CSS styles) without
reloading the page. (Other answers: Create pop-ups, sliders, load data in
the background).
Q4. Differentiate between a Virus and a Worm.
 Answer: | Feature | Virus | Worm | |---|---|---| | How it Spreads | Requires a host file
(e.g., .exe, .doc) and human action (e.g., opening the file) to spread. | Can self-replicate
and spread automatically across a network from one computer to another, exploiting a
vulnerability. | | Standalone | No, it is a piece of code attached to a legitimate program
(parasitic). | Yes, it is a standalone program that runs on its own. |
EVALUATION / ASSIGNMENT (WEEK 8)
 Answer the following SSCE-style questions:
1. (a) What is the "Internet of Things" (IoT)? (b) Describe two (2) applications of
IoT (one in the home, one in a city).
2. (a) What does OOP stand for? (b) Differentiate between a "Class" and an
"Object."
3. (a) What is a VPN? (b) State two (2) major benefits of using a VPN on public Wi-
Fi.
WEEK 9: REVISION OF SSCE PAST QUESTIONS II (CASE STUDIES / APPLIED ICT)
9.1 INTRODUCTION
This week, we practice the hardest type of question: the Case Study or Applied ICT question.
These questions don't just ask you to define a term; they give you a real-world scenario and ask
you to apply your knowledge to solve a problem.
9.2 STRATEGY FOR CASE STUDIES
53
1. Read and Identify: Read the scenario carefully. Identify the client, the problem, and the
goals.
2. Select the Best Tool: The question is testing your judgement. Don't just list every
technology you know. Choose the most appropriate one.
o Problem: "Needs to share files in an office" -> LAN
o Problem: "Needs a dynamic, interactive website" -> JavaScript
o Problem: "Needs to store customer data" -> Database (RDBMS)
o Problem: "Needs to secure the office network" -> Firewall
3. Justify Your Answer: Why did you choose that tool? Explain how it solves the client's
specific problem.
9.3 WORKED EXAMPLES (CASE STUDIES)
Case Study 1: The New Business
 Scenario: "Mrs. Okoro is starting a new small business with 15 employees in one
building. She wants her staff to be able to share files, access a single customer database,
and share one printer. She also needs an internet connection, but is very worried about
hackers."
 Question: "Advise Mrs. Okoro on the four (4) most important hardware and software
components she will need to set up her office network."
 Answer Strategy:
1. Problem: Needs to connect 15 staff in one building (this screams "LAN"). Needs
to share resources (files, printer, database). Needs security.
2. My Answer:
 1. A LAN (Local Area Network) setup: She will first need a Switch and
Ethernet Cables to physically connect all 15 computers and the printer.
This creates the LAN.
 2. A Server: Instead of a simple "peer-to-peer" network, she should have
a central Server. This server will host the customer Database (using a
DBMS like MySQL) and the shared files, making them easy to back up
and manage.
54
 3. A Router: This device is essential. It will manage the LAN and, most
importantly, provide the internet connection to all 15 staff by connecting
to her ISP.
 4. A Firewall: Because she is "worried about hackers," a hardware
Firewall (often included in the router) is critical. This will act as a
gatekeeper, blocking unauthorized access from the internet to her private
office network, thus protecting her customer database.
Case Study 2: The E-Commerce Website
 Scenario: "A fashion designer wants to build a new e-commerce website to sell clothes.
She has the following requirements:
o It must look good on phones and desktops.
o Users must be able to create an account and log in.
o The website must show live inventory (how many items are left).
o She needs to track all her sales and customers."
 Question: "List and describe the four (4) key technologies that will be required to build
this website."
 Answer Strategy:
1. Problem: E-commerce site. Needs to be responsive, interactive, and data-driven.
2. My Answer:
 1. HTML/CSS with Responsive Design: The foundation. HTML will
structure the product pages, and CSS will style them. Critically, CSS
Media Queries must be used to ensure the site is responsive and looks
good on phones, as she requested.
 2. JavaScript: This is essential for the interactive parts. It will be used for
form validation (on the "create account" page) and for creating image
sliders to show off the clothes.
 3. A Backend Language (e.g., Python/PHP): She needs a server-side
language to handle logic that can't be done in the browser, such as
55
processing payments, verifying passwords at login, and checking the
inventory.
 4. A Database (e.g., MySQL with SQL): This is the heart of the store. A
database is required to store all the data, including user accounts
(usernames, hashed passwords), product details (price, inventory count),
and sales records. The backend language will use SQL to UPDATE the
inventory after a sale.
EVALUATION / ASSIGNMENT (WEEK 9)
 Answer the following SSCE-style Case Study:
 Scenario: "The Principal of your school wants to reduce paper waste and improve
communication. He wants a new system where:
1. Student results can be recorded and checked online by parents.
2. The school can send alerts to parents' phones.
3. Students can submit assignments online."
 Question: "Based on your SS1-SS3 knowledge, recommend and describe three (3) major
digital technologies or systems that would be needed to build this 'School Portal'."
(Justify why each is needed for the Principal's specific goals).
56
WEEK 10: MOCK EXAM PREPARATION
10.1 INTRODUCTION
This week, we conduct a full-scale Mock Examination. This is designed to simulate the exact
conditions of your SSCE. It will test your knowledge, time management, and examination
strategy.
 Part 1: Objective (MCQs)
 Part 2: Theory & Case Studies (Essays)
10.2 COMMON MISTAKES TO AVOID
 Running out of time: You must allocate your time. Do not spend 30 minutes on a 10-
mark question.
 Misreading the question: Reading "List" and "Explain" as the same thing. (See Week 8).
 Not using examples: An "explain" question without an example is an incomplete answer.
 Case Study Panic: Getting intimidated by the story. Just break it down into "Problem ->
Solution -> Justification" as practiced in Week 9.
10.3 FINAL REVIEW: TOP 10 "MUST-KNOW" CONCEPTS
1. LAN vs WAN: The most basic network distinction.
2. HTML + CSS + JS: The 3 legs of the web. What does each one do?
3. Database (Table, Record, Field): The structure of data.
4. SQL (SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE): The 4 basic DML/DQL commands.
5. Virus vs Worm: The classic malware question.
6. Firewall: The "gatekeeper" concept.
7. VPN: The "encrypted tunnel" for security and privacy.
8. Cloud (IaaS, PaaS, SaaS): The 3 service models. (Gmail is SaaS!)
9. OOP (Class vs Object): The "blueprint" vs the "house."
10. SDLC (Waterfall vs Agile): The two main models for building software.
ASSIGNMENT (WEEK 10)
57
 The primary assignment is to sit for the full Mock Examination provided by your
teacher.
 After the exam, your assignment is to review your marked script.
 Identify your three weakest topics and write a 1-page summary on each one to close your
knowledge gap.
58
WEEK 11-13: REVISION & EXAMINATIONS
 This period is for final, intensive revision for your SSCE (WASSCE/NECO)
examinations.
 Focus on your personal weak areas identified in the Mock Exam.
 Practice writing answers under timed conditions.
 Good luck!
59
SS3 DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES LESSON NOTES
THIRD TERM (FINAL REVISION & PROJECTS)
WEEK 1: COMPREHENSIVE REVISION OF SS1–SS3
1.1 INTRODUCTION
Welcome to your final term. This term is not about learning new topics, but about consolidation
and application. We will synthesize everything from SS1 (Basic Hardware), SS2
(Programming/Web/Database), and SS3 (Advanced Systems) to prepare you for your practical
projects and your final SSCE examination (WAEC/NECO).
1.2 THE FIVE PILLARS OF DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES (COMPREHENSIVE
REVIEW)
This is a high-level overview of the major areas you must know.
PILLAR 1: COMPUTER HARDWARE & TROUBLESHOOTING
 SS1 Core Components:
o CPU (Central Processing Unit): The "brain." Executes all instructions.
o Motherboard: The "nervous system." Connects all components.
o RAM (Random Access Memory): Volatile (temporary) memory for active
programs (your "work desk").
o PSU (Power Supply Unit): Converts AC (from wall) to DC (for components).
o Storage (Non-Volatile): Permanent memory (your "filing cabinet").
 SS3 Storage (Advanced):
o HDD (Hard Disk Drive): Mechanical, spinning platters. Slow, cheap, high
capacity.
o SSD (Solid State Drive): Flash memory, no moving parts. Very fast, durable,
more expensive. (SATA & M.2/NVMe form factors).
 SS3 Expansion Components:
60
o GPU (Graphics Processing Unit): A dedicated card for rendering images
(gaming, video editing). Plugs into the PCIe x16 slot.
o iGPU (Integrated): GPU built into the CPU. Weak, for basic tasks.
 SS3 Troubleshooting:
o POST (Power-On Self-Test): The first check the BIOS/UEFI runs.
o Beep Codes: How the motherboard reports a hardware failure before video starts.
(e.g., 1 long, 3 short = Video Card; 3 short = RAM).
o BSOD (Blue Screen): A software (OS or Driver) or hardware (RAM) crash.
Check the "Stop Code."
o Boot Failure ("No Bootable Device"): Check BIOS boot order, check SATA
cables, or OS is corrupt.
PILLAR 2: PROGRAMMING & SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT
 SS2 Core Logic:
o Variables: Named containers for data (String, Integer, Boolean).
o Conditionals: IF...ELSE (making decisions).
o Loops: FOR...WHILE (repeating tasks).
 SS3 Advanced Programming:
o Functions: Reusable, named blocks of code (DRY Principle: "Don't Repeat
Yourself").
o Arrays/Lists: A single variable that holds a collection of items.
o OOP (Object-Oriented Programming):
 Class: The "blueprint" (e.g., class Student).
 Object: The "instance" built from the blueprint (e.g., student_Bello).
 Attributes: Properties (e.g., student_Bello.name).
 Methods: Actions (e.g., student_Bello.introduce_self()).
 SS3 SDLC (Software Development Life Cycle):
o The 6 phases: Planning -> Design -> Implementation (Code) -> Testing ->
Deployment -> Maintenance.
o Waterfall Model: Linear, sequential (Finish Phase 1 before Phase 2). Inflexible.
o Agile Model: Iterative (small "sprints"). Flexible, welcomes change.
61
PILLAR 3: NETWORKING & SECURITY
 SS2 Networking:
o Types: LAN (Local/Office), WAN (Wide/Internet), MAN (Metro).
o Topologies: Star (modern), Bus (old), Ring.
 SS3 Advanced Networking:
o IP Addressing: IPv4 (e.g., 192.168.1.10) and IPv6.
o Subnet Mask: (e.g., 255.255.255.0). Separates the Network ID from the Host ID.
o Protocols (The "Rules"):
 TCP: Reliable (checks for errors, e.g., file download).
 UDP: Fast (no error check, e.g., video streaming).
 HTTP/HTTPS: For websites (S = Secure).
 DHCP: Automatically assigns IP addresses.
 SS3 Network Security:
o CIA Triad: Confidentiality (secrecy), Integrity (trustworthy data), Availability (it
works).
o Malware: Virus, Worm (self-spreads), Trojan (disguised), Ransomware
(encrypts).
o Firewall: The "gatekeeper" that blocks/allows traffic.
o VPN (Virtual Private Network): An "encrypted tunnel" for privacy and security.
PILLAR 4: WEB & DATABASE
 SS2 Basic Web:
o HTML: The structure (skeleton).
o CSS: The style (clothes).
 SS3 Advanced Web:
o JavaScript (JS): The behaviour (muscles/brain). Makes the site interactive.
o DOM (Document Object Model): The "map" of the HTML that JS manipulates.
o Responsive Design: Using CSS Media Queries to make a site look good on both
phones and desktops.
 SS3 Database (SQL):
62
o RDBMS: Relational Database Management System (e.g., MySQL).
o SQL (Structured Query Language): The language used to talk to a database.
o DML: SELECT (get data), INSERT (add data), UPDATE (change data),
DELETE (remove data).
o DDL: CREATE TABLE (builds the structure).
PILLAR 5: MODERN TECHNOLOGIES & SYSTEMS
 SS3 Virtualization & Cloud:
o Virtualization: A hypervisor (e.g., VirtualBox) runs a "virtual" PC (a VM) inside
a physical one.
o Cloud Computing: Renting IT resources (servers, storage) over the internet.
o IaaS: Renting raw servers/storage (for IT admins).
o PaaS: Renting a platform to build apps (for developers).
o SaaS: Renting a finished app (e.g., Gmail, Netflix) (for end-users).
 SS3 Internet of Things (IoT): "Smart" devices (sensors) that connect to the internet to
send/receive data (e.g., Smart Watch, Smart Home).
 SS3 Data Protection:
o Backup vs. Redundancy: Backup = Spare tire (recovery). Redundancy = Dualwheel
truck (no downtime).
o 3-2-1 Rule: 3 Copies, on 2 different media, with 1 copy off-site.
o RPO (Recovery Point Objective): How much data can we lose?
o RTO (Recovery Time Objective): How much time can we be down?
 SS3 Project Management:
o Iron Triangle: Time, Cost, Scope. You can't change one without affecting the
others.
o Tools: Kanban (visual flow), Gantt (timeline/schedule).
EVALUATION (WEEK 1)
1. Explain the "3-2-1" rule of data backup.
2. Differentiate between the Agile and Waterfall SDLC models.
63
3. A client's PC gives "1 long, 3 short" beeps. What is the most likely hardware fault?
4. In OOP, what is the difference between a "Class" and an "Object"?
5. What is the purpose of a CSS Media Query?
ASSIGNMENT (WEEK 1)
1. Create a "Concept Map" (a diagram with bubbles and arrows) that links the following 10
terms together: Cloud (SaaS), IoT, JavaScript, HTML, SQL, Database, Responsive
Design, Network, Firewall, VPN.
2. Your map should visually explain how these technologies interact to create a modern
application.
64
WEEK 2: PAST QUESTION DRILLS (WAEC/NECO)
2.1 INTRODUCTION
This week is pure practice. We will apply the consolidated knowledge from Week 1 to SSCEstyle
questions.
2.2 OBJECTIVE QUESTIONS (SAMPLE)
1. A developer is creating a software project where the client's requirements are expected
to change frequently. Which SDLC model is most appropriate? (A) Waterfall (B) Agile (C)
Spiral (D) V-Model
2. Which of the following SQL commands is part of the Data Manipulation Language
(DML)? (A) CREATE (B) DROP (C) UPDATE (D) ALTER
3. A user's computer is on, but the screen is dark. A faint image is visible when a torch is
shined on the screen. What component has likely failed? (A) The GPU (B) The Backlight (C)
The RAM (D) The LCD (Liquid Crystal)
4. A technician is upgrading a laptop. Which type of RAM module will they use? (A)
DIMM (B) EDO-RAM (C) SO-DIMM (D) VRAM
5. What is the primary function of a DHCP server on a network? (A) To block viruses and
malware. (B) To translate domain names (like https://www.google.com/search?q=google.com)
into IP addresses. (C) To automatically assign IP addresses to devices. (D) To encrypt all
network traffic for security.
6. A client wants a storage solution that is silent, durable, and has the fastest possible boot
time for their OS. The technician should recommend: (A) A 7200RPM HDD (B) A
5400RPM HDD (C) A SATA SSD (D) An NVMe M.2 SSD
65
7. A user finds all their documents have been renamed with a ".locked" extension and a
text file is demanding Bitcoin. This is an example of: (A) A Virus (B) A Worm (C) A Trojan
(D) Ransomware
8. In OOP, a class Car has a property called self.color. This self.color is an: (A) Method (B)
Object (C) Attribute (D) Function
9. Gmail and Netflix are examples of which cloud computing service model? (A) IaaS
(Infrastructure as a Service) (B) PaaS (Platform as a Service) (C) SaaS (Software as a Service)
(D) FaaS (Function as a Service)
10. A user types ipconfig and sees an IP address of 169.254.100.50. What does this indicate?
(A) The PC has a valid public IP address. (B) The PC is on the 169.254 network. (C) The PC has
failed to get an address from the DHCP server. (D) The PC's network adapter has failed.
(Answers: 1-B, 2-C, 3-B, 4-C, 5-C, 6-D, 7-D, 8-C, 9-C, 10-C)
2.3 THEORY / ESSAY QUESTIONS (SAMPLE)
Question 1: Networking & Security (a) Define the following terms: (i) Firewall (ii) VPN
(Virtual Private Network) (iii) The "CIA" Triad of Security (b) A client's home Wi-Fi is slow.
List four (4) possible causes a technician should investigate.
Question 2: Hardware & Troubleshooting (a) What is the "POST" of a computer? (b)
Differentiate between an SSD and an HDD. (c) A client wants to upgrade their PC's Graphics
Card (GPU). List the three (3) critical compatibility factors the technician must check before
recommending a new card.
Question 3: Database (Case Study) A school needs to create a database. They want one table to
hold student information and another to hold their subject choices. (a) Write the SQL CREATE
TABLE command for a Students table with the following columns: * StudentID (an integer, it
should be the primary key) * FirstName (text, up to 50 characters) * LastName (text, up to 50
characters) * DateOfBirth (a date) (b) Write the SELECT query that would show only the
FirstName and LastName of all students in the Students table.
66
EVALUATION (WEEK 2)
1. Attempt all 10 objective questions.
2. Choose two (2) of the three theory questions and write a full-page answer for each,
following the "Define, Explain, Example" structure.
ASSIGNMENT (WEEK 2)
1. Write a full answer to the Theory Question you did not choose for the evaluation.
2. Create three (3) new objective questions of your own, based on the SS3 syllabus.
67
WEEK 3: PRACTICAL PROJECT I (WEBSITE/DATABASE)
3.1 PROJECT BRIEF: "MY SCHOOL PORTAL"
Objective: To design the prototype for a simple, functional school portal. This project will
combine your skills in web design (HTML/CSS/JS) and database management (SQL).
Project Components:
1. The Database (The "Backend"): The database (e.g., MySQL or SQLite) will store the
information.
2. The Website (The "Frontend"): The HTML/CSS pages that the user interacts with.
3. The Logic (The "Brain"): The JS or server-side code that connects the frontend to the
backend.
3.2 PART 1: THE DATABASE DESIGN
First, we must design the "schema" for our database. We will need two tables.
Table 1: Students
 This table holds the student's login and personal info.
 SQL CREATE TABLE Command:
 CREATE TABLE Students (
 StudentID VARCHAR(10) PRIMARY KEY,
 Password VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL,
 FirstName VARCHAR(100),
 LastName VARCHAR(100),
 Class VARCHAR(10)
 );
Table 2: Results
 This table holds the grades, linked by the StudentID.
68
 SQL CREATE TABLE Command:
 CREATE TABLE Results (
 ResultID INT AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
 StudentID VARCHAR(10),
 Subject VARCHAR(50),
 TestScore INT,
 ExamScore INT,
 FOREIGN KEY (StudentID) REFERENCES Students(StudentID)
 );
3.3 PART 2: THE WEBSITE (FRONTEND)
You will create two HTML files.
File 1: login.html (The Login Page)
 HTML: Needs a simple form with:
o A text input for StudentID.
o A password input for Password.
o A "Login" button.
 CSS: Style the form to be centered, clean, and professional.
File 2: portal.html (The Dashboard)
 This is the page the user sees after logging in.
 HTML:
o A "Welcome, [Student Name]" section.
o A section for "My Details" (FirstName, LastName, Class).
o A large table with headings: Subject, Test Score, Exam Score.
 JavaScript:
o You will "mock" the login.
o Write a JS function for the "Login" button.
o If StudentID = "SS3-001" and Password = "1234", then redirect to portal.html.
69
o In portal.html, write JS to dynamically fill in the table with "dummy" data (e.g.,
"Maths - 30 - 55"). This simulates fetching data from the database.
3.4 DELIVERABLES (WHAT TO SUBMIT)
1. A text file (schema.sql) containing your two CREATE TABLE commands.
2. Your login.html file (with HTML, CSS, and JS).
3. Your portal.html file (with HTML, CSS, and JS).
4. (Optional) A simple "Home Page" (index.html) that links to the login page.
5. A 1-page report explaining how your system would work in a real-world scenario (e.g.,
how the JS would use fetch() to call a server, which would then run the SQL SELECT
query).
EVALUATION (WEEK 3)
1. Complete the database design (schema.sql).
2. What is a PRIMARY KEY in SQL?
3. What is a FOREIGN KEY, and why is it used in the Results table?
ASSIGNMENT (WEEK 3)
1. Begin building the login.html and portal.html files. Focus on making them clean and
responsive (use Media Queries!).
2. (Bonus) Add a simple JavaScript logout() function to the portal.html page that redirects
the user back to login.html.
70
WEEK 4: PRACTICAL PROJECT II (CYBERSECURITY & IOT)
4.1 PART A: CYBERSECURITY SIMULATION (PHISHING ATTACK)
Objective: To demonstrate your "civic skill" (SS3 T2) of critical thinking and identifying digital
threats.
The Scenario: You receive the following email in your inbox.
From: GTBank Security gtb-alert-service@security-mail.com Subject: URGENT: Your
Account Has Been Suspended!
Dear Valued Customer,
Our records show that your Guaranty Trust Bank account has been flagged for unusual activity.
For your own protection, we have temporarily suspended your account.
To restore access, you must verify your identity immediately. Failure to comply within 24 hours
will result in permanent account closure.
Please click the link below to be redirected to our secure server:
https://www.google.com/search?q=http://gtbank.verify-portal.net/login.php
Thank you, The GTBank Team.
The Task (Your Deliverable): Write a 1-page "Security Report" for a non-technical user (like
your parent) explaining why this email is a phishing attack. You must identify at least five (5)
red flags (clues) from the email text.
 Example Clues:
o Sender's Email: (Is it from @gtbank.com?)
o Generic Greeting: (Did they use your name?)
o Sense of Urgency: (e.g., "URGENT," "24 hours").
o The URL/Link: (Hover over it. Does it go to gtbank.com?)
o Spelling/Grammar: (Any mistakes?)
71
o The Request: (Why would they need you to "verify" by clicking a link?)
4.2 PART B: IOT DEMO (CONCEPTUAL DESIGN)
Objective: To apply your knowledge of IoT (from SS3 T1) to design a practical solution to a
local problem.
The Problem: The water tank on the roof of your school (or house) runs empty at bad times, or
it overflows when pumping, wasting water and electricity.
The Task (Your Deliverable): Design a "Smart Water Tank" monitoring system. You must not
build it, but design it on paper. Your 1-page design document must clearly state the 4
Components of your IoT system:
1. The "Thing" (Sensors):
o What sensor will you use inside the tank to measure the water level? (Hint: An
Ultrasonic Sensor on the lid, or a Float Switch).
o What is the "brain" at the tank? (e.g., an ESP32 or ESP8266 Wi-Fi
microcontroller).
2. Connectivity:
o How does the sensor "talk" to the internet? (e.g., It will connect to the school's
Wi-Fi).
3. Data Processing (The "Cloud"):
o Where does the data go? (e.g., "It sends the data to a free IoT dashboard like
ThingSpeak").
o What are the "rules"? (e.g., "IF level < 10%, THEN send 'Tank Empty' alert." "IF
level > 95%, THEN send 'Tank Full' alert.").
4. User Interface (The "App"):
o How does the user see the information? (e.g., "A mobile app," "A simple web
page," "An SMS alert to the Principal's phone," "A red/green light in the kitchen").
EVALUATION (WEEK 4)
72
1. Complete the Phishing Attack report.
2. Complete the IoT Smart Tank design.
3. (In class) Present your IoT design to the group.
ASSIGNMENT (WEEK 4)
1. Combine your two project reports (Phishing and IoT) into a single "Practical Project"
document, ready for submission.
73
WEEK 5: MIDTERM TEST
This week is for a comprehensive midterm test. It should be a mini-mock exam, combining
objective questions and theory questions from all three terms, with an emphasis on SS3 content.
74
WEEK 6: MOCK EXAMINATION
This week is dedicated to a full-scale Mock SSCE Examination (Theory and Objective), held
under official exam conditions. The questions below can serve as a new, full-length sample paper.
MOCK EXAMINATION (SAMPLE PAPER)
SECTION A: OBJECTIVE (Answer all)
1. The "3-2-1 Rule" is a best practice for: (A) SDLC (B) Network Security (C) Data Backup
(D) OOP
2. In OOP, a function that belongs to a class is called a(n): (A) Attribute (B) Method (C)
Instance (D) Variable
3. Which protocol is "unreliable" but fast, making it ideal for video streaming? (A) TCP (B)
UDP (C) HTTP (D) FTP
4. A technician building a high-end gaming PC will plug the GPU into which slot? (A) PCI
(B) PCIe x1 (C) PCIe x16 (D) SATA
5. Which of the following is not a "Big Three" component of the CIA Triad? (A)
Confidentiality (B_ Authentication (C) Integrity (D) Availability
SECTION B: THEORY/ESSAY (Answer 3 questions)
Q1. (a) What is the "Internet of Things" (IoT)? (b) List and describe the four (4) essential
components of any IoT system. (c) Give one (1) practical example of an IoT application.
Q2. (a) Define "Malware" and list three (3) common types. (b) What is a "Phishing
Attack"? (c) As a technician, explain three (3) "Prevention" strategies you would teach a
client to keep their PC secure.
Q3. (Case Study) A client wants to upgrade their 5-year-old laptop. It is very slow to boot
up, and they can't run many programs at once. The laptop currently has a 500GB HDD
75
and 4GB of DDR3 RAM. (a) Identify the two (2) main hardware "bottlenecks" causing the
problems. (b) Propose a two-part hardware upgrade plan to solve these issues. (c) Explain
the specific type of RAM the client must buy (hint: form factor and type). (d) Explain the
two (2) options the client has for getting their Windows OS onto the new drive.
Q4. (a) Differentiate between "IaaS," "PaaS," and "SaaS" cloud computing models. (b)
Give one (1) commercial example of each. (c) What is the relationship between
"Virtualization" and "Cloud Computing"?
WEEK 7: MIDTERM BREAK
This is a break for rest and independent study based on the results of the Mock Examination.
76
WEEK 8: SSCE PREPARATION (FINAL EXAM-FOCUSED REVIEW)
8.1 EXAM DAY STRATEGY
1. Arrive Early: Be calm, have your tools (pen, pencil, ID).
2. Read the Instructions: Always. How many questions to answer? From which sections?
3. Time Management (The "Clock"):
o Divide your time. (e.g., 60 mins for 50 Objectives = ~1 min per question. 90 mins
for 3 Essays = 30 mins per essay).
o Stick to your time! Do not spend 45 minutes on one essay.
o Answer the questions you know first.
8.2 OBJECTIVE STRATEGY
 Process of Elimination: Instantly cross out the 2 "stupid" answers.
 Read the Question: Look for "NOT" or "EXCEPT." (e.g., "All of the following are
malware EXCEPT...").
 No Blanks: Answer every question, even if you have to guess.
8.3 THEORY/ESSAY STRATEGY (THE "VERB")
Your answer must match the "verb" in the question.
 "LIST..." / "STATE...": (e.g., "List 4 malware types").
o Answer: 1. Virus, 2. Worm, 3. Trojan, 4. Ransomware.
o DO NOT write an essay. You are wasting time.
 "DEFINE...": (e.g., "Define VPN").
o Answer: "A VPN is a Virtual Private Network, which is a technology that creates
a secure, encrypted connection (a 'tunnel') over a public network (the internet)."
 "EXPLAIN..." / "DISCUSS..." / "DESCRIBE...": (e.g., "Explain the 4 pillars of
OOP").
o This is where you get your marks. Use the D-E-E method:
 Define: "Encapsulation is the bundling of data (attributes) and methods..."
77
 Explain: "It hides the internal complexity of an object..."
 Example: "A car is encapsulated; you use the steering wheel (method)
without knowing how the engine (attributes) works."
8.4 FINAL "CRAM" CHECKLIST: TOP 20 MUST-KNOW CONCEPTS
1. OOP: Class, Object, Attribute, Method.
2. SDLC: 6 Phases (Plan, Design, Implement, Test, Deploy, Maintain).
3. SDLC Models: Waterfall (rigid) vs. Agile (flexible).
4. SQL DML: SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE.
5. SQL DDL: CREATE TABLE.
6. HTML/CSS/JS: Structure / Style / Behaviour.
7. Responsive Design: Using @media queries.
8. Network Protocols: TCP (reliable) vs. UDP (fast), DHCP (auto-IP).
9. Network Security: CIA Triad (Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability).
10. VPN: "Encrypted tunnel."
11. Malware: Virus, Worm, Trojan, Ransomware.
12. Phishing: A "trick" email.
13. Storage: HDD (mechanical) vs. SSD (flash).
14. Hardware Upgrade: Upgrading RAM (DIMM/SO-DIMM) or GPU (check PSU, size).
15. Troubleshooting: POST/Beep Codes (Hardware), BSOD (Software/RAM).
16. Network Test: ipconfig, ping (Gateway vs. 8.8.8.8 vs.
https://www.google.com/search?q=google.com).
17. Cloud: IaaS, PaaS, SaaS (Gmail).
18. Virtualization: A "Hypervisor" runs a "VM."
19. IoT: 4 Components (Sensor, Connectivity, Processing, UI).
20. Data Backup: 3-2-1 Rule.
EVALUATION / ASSIGNMENT (WEEK 8)
1. Go through the "Top 20" list.
2. Find the three (3) topics you feel least confident about.
78
3. Spend this week's study time reviewing only those three topics from your SS3 T1 and T2
notes.
4. Write a one-page summary for each of your three weak topics.